
Matlab routines for the Ocean Scientist (1.4)  14/Mar/94
--------------------------------------------------------

This directory contains a number of Matlab routines that may be useful
for anyone dealing with the ocean. Some of the routines that compute
physical parameters have been converted from existing fortran routines,
but have been changed to allow the passing of vectors and matrices in
the usual Matlab style.  Loops have been avoided as much as possible in
favour of vectorization, and so computations are in general very fast.

All routines have been made into .m files rather than fmex/cmex files
because the fmex/cmex  interface is crummy - You can't get help
information, argument passing is obscure, and it is messy. 


Currently available functions:

a) Physical properties of seawater

adiabattempgrad : adiabatic temperature gradient (used by
                  potentialtemp, bvfreq, and soundspeed)
         bvfreq : Bouyancy (Brunt-Vaisala) frequency
          depth : Depth given pressure at some latitude
  potentialtemp : Potential temperature (also used by bvfreq)
       pressure : Pressure at given depth at some latitude
     soundspeed : Speed of sound using various standard equations
                  (del grosso, chen and millero, etc.)
           swcp : Heat capacity for sea water
   swfreezetemp : Freezing point of sea water
        swstate : Equation of state for sea water (returns density and
                  specific volume anomalies or derivatives of same w.r.t.
                  S,T,P). Also used by bvfreq and soundspeed.


2) Geographical/Geometrical Properties

           dist : Range/bearing of points on the earth using various
                  ellipsoids (wsg84, clarke66, etc.). Can also
                  compute points along geodesics.
         inside : Determines whether points are inside or outside an
                  arbitrary polygon (useful for discriminating between land
                  and water points, for example)

3) Special plotting routines

       cnv2imag : Converts interpolated pcolor pics to
                  images (faster printing, discrete colours).
      stickplot : Standard stickplot graph for vector time series 
      tsdiagram : Draws a TS diagram, with density contours and freezing
                  curve.
           whoi : Draws the WHOI  logo in the bottom corner of a plot
 (whoilogo.mat) : Bitmap info for WHOI logo.
       worldmap : Draws a map of the world (uses the coasts.mat datafile)
   (coasts.mat) : Coastline database for map (1/4 degree resolution).

4) Miscellaneous

       Contents : Help information
        geodemo : A fun demo for map and dist
         indemo : A demonstration program showing the capabilities of
                  inside
       integral : Time series integration using Simpsons Rule
      stickdemo : demo program for stickplot


Feel free to (ab)use these routines. If you like them, tell your
friends. If you don't, or if you find any bugs, please tell
me! Likewise if you have "improved" the routines. 



Installation Notes
------------------

When ftp'ing the files, don't forget to set binary mode to get
the whoilogo.mat and coasts.mat files!

The easiest thing to do is to copy everything into ~/matlab. On 
the other hand, a more permanent home may be underneath
/usr/local/matlab/toolbox/oceans. If you put them there, change
MATLABPATH (either in the matlab script or in .login). 

Everything has been changed to work with Matlab 4.1. Some things will
still work with older versions, but due to design changes in
the user interface (notably the graphics and the changed usage
of "ones" and "zeros") they may not. I am no longer interested
in supporting older versions of Matlab!


Changes since Version 1.0
--------------------------

-swstate.m can now also compute first derivatives w.r.t to S,T,P.
-soundspeed.m can now also compute ssp using a direct evaluation of 
 derivatives of the equation of state.


Changes since Version 1.1
-------------------------

-geodesics computations in dist.
-world map program and coastline database added.
-demo program "geodesics" added.
-tsdiagram...another little demo (which may even be useful).
-whoi logo program (for that professional look!)

Changes since Version 1.2
-------------------------

-demo program "indemo" for inside
-point-in-polygon determination using "inside"
-stickplot demo program
-help file "oceans"

Changes since Version 1.3
-------------------------

-Matlab 4.1 compatability.
-better coastline database for map (renamed "worldmap" to prevent
 confusion with the image procesing toolbox).
-Bug fixes


Rich Pawlowicz  - Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
rich@boreas.whoi.edu   (508) 540-1400 x3316



